[Music]
welcome to what is going home for New
thought from the edge of M each week on
M times flagship radio show veteran
broadcaster author and media consultant
Sandy sedge beer conducts
thought-provoking interviews with
inspirational authors artists musicians
scientists speakers and filmmakers who
are working at the point where
spirituality and science meet
Consciousness at the very edge of om
here is your host Sandy
sbear hello and welcome today we're
going to be talking about life after
death Heaven and Hell and
reincarnation Christopher bash is
professor emeritus in the department of
philosophy and religious studies at
Youngstown State University adjunct
faculty at the California Institute of
integral studies a Meritus fellow at The
Institute of noetic Sciences and he's on
the advisory Council of gr Legacy
training an award-winning teacher and
international speaker he is the author
of four books including one that I rate
as one of my favorite of all time LSD
and the mind of the universe diamonds
from Heaven which Chronicles his 20year
psychedelic Journey exploring
Consciousness and the other book which
we're going to be discussing today is
life cycles
reincarnation and the Web of Life which
combines scientist testimonies about
reincarnation with the synthesis of
findings from Consciousness research and
near-death studies Christopher bash
welcome back to the show hi Sandy it's a
pleasure to be with you today you too so
life cycles has been held as the first
book to both describe the Dynamics of
rebirth and explore the
ramifications of adopting a
reincarnationist
perspective now this was published what
35 years ago thereabouts yeah so that
was right after you had started your
journey with LSD how many years into
that journey and how did that Journey
Inspire this well I started my uh
psychedelic work the after one year my
first year of being an academic and I
worked for four years and then I stopped
for six years and during that six-year
interval I did uh three years of past
life therapy uncovering and working with
my own former lives and I wrote life
cycles uh so my psychedelic work by that
time had reached deeply enough that I
had been given many personal insights
into Karma the deeper cause and effect
that underlies our lives but at that
time I had not had um personal
experiences of my former lives in a
psychedelic context I had in a
hypnotherapy context but not a
psychedelic context but it really was my
study of Ian Stevenson and then later
other uh Pioneers in the research uh
documenting children and adults with
validated verified past lives memories
uh that really became the foundation for
my work in life cycles yeah I mean you
shared a few of those stories um which I
have you know read before and they're
absolutely fascinating because the whole
circumstances there's just so much
evidence there that you know you really
can't question it one of them that
really interested me was the child um
who um you mentioned Dr Helen wach who
um had a a patient a 5-year-old girl who
rejected human contact and withdrew into
childhood autism but somehow she
demonstrated mathematical and reading
skills which she had not been taught um
but she she would not communicate but
then over the period of their um work
together she showed Dr wach the how she
felt what she was feeling by Force
feeding her with you know a a baby
bottle because she felt totally totally
you know that she was being treated like
a helpless infant yeah and when and when
the doctor um you know understood that
then the child started coming into
herself yeah but she lost the reading
and she lost the mathematics I mean
stories like that are just you know what
do you make of them well what I make of
them is that um life is much long Our
lives our personal lives our let's say
our individual lives are much longer
than we presently tend to think that
they are and that they're always
beginning and starting and there are
overlaps and once you understand the
larger life of the Soul then this kind
of
continuity of qualities Knowledge
Learning attitudes traumas uh virtues
uh that are kind of blending from one
life into the start of another life
where we pick up and continue to the
learning I'm making it over simple
overly linear and overly simple but that
basic idea that there is a blending we
don't start our lives a tarasa we don't
start our lives blank we start our lives
with a history which is a specific
history which we can see very clearly
when we begin to look at children with
fresh eyes
H why is it the last it's always the
last life you know that they seem to
talk about well it's not always the
laugh last life actually in the
literature Stephenson's research focuses
on children who have an active recall of
their most immediate former life their
last life but remember that Stephenson's
research is addressing a very uh unusual
population children who have spontaneous
memories of their farmer lives most
people do not have spontaneous memories
of their farmer lives his children are
reincarnating very quickly compared to
the population at large only an average
of two and a half years and very close
to their life circumstance of their
previous Life 50 years studies which
look at larger people larger populations
of people who don't have spontaneous
recall indicate a a longer time frame
between lifetimes and a much broader
geographical radius so it's it's so it's
that is a little bit of a distortion
from the research protocol when we look
at uh therapy people come to the
therapeutic literature people come to
therapy because of pain and sometimes
this pain is grounded in something that
happened to them in their recent past
their recent incarnational past but not
always sometimes it comes from several
lifetimes before so the way I think of
it is our former lives are like a deck
of playing cards we may have had 52
lives but only a handful of those cards
are active in this present life and
those let's say five cards come from
different centuries and only weave
together certain elements of those five
lives into the composite that makes up
the present life so when we when we kind
of develop a more textured understanding
we begin to understand that it's not a
linear development from life to Lifetime
is that we go back to the soul the soul
holds all of our former lives and then
the Soul decides which of those former
lives in which combination it's going to
Incarnate into as the next
Incarnation Yeah you mentioned the word
soul but in the book you make um you
know a distinction between soul and over
Soul yeah so what is the difference well
uh and then at the end of the book I
dissolve that distinction but the soul
the the distinction is that for
westerners who are accustomed to
thinking of the Soul as the spiritual
essence of this present lifetime we need
a larger concept of soul to include all
of our former lifetimes and for that I
use the concept of the oversoul
borrowing that term from other other
people at the end in the end of the book
I say it gets increasingly cumbersome to
maintain this Division and for
me the word the soul and I usually
differentiate it by capital S soul with
a capital S is what I mean by the
oversoul the Consciousness that holds
all of our
lifetimes soul with the small s is the
Consciousness that's integrating all my
experience expences in this Incarnation
so the overs soul is what some people
would call the higher self the part of
them that you know continues
forever yes I think so yeah so I was
doing some research today and I came
across this article on psychology today
by Dr Alex lickerman who is um a
Buddhist um but he doesn't believe in
reincarnation but he said that
the real question at the heart of
reincarnation is not one of evidence but
one of
identity
yeah good point I I haven't read that
article I'd be interested in in seeing
what he says
uh yeah I think once you move into a
reincarnational
worldview the concept of identity ex
shifts and expands because I accept this
body and my personality as my current
identity and you know if I have deep
mystical experiences of Oneness with the
universe that I would accept a
universal Cosmic Principle as my deeper
identity the concept of the soul is kind
of intermediate position isn't it
because it's on the one hand it's
individual it's because my soul and your
soul are different in that they reflect
different histories and they have an
individuated quality but if you ask the
question what is the essence of the Soul
what is the essence of that spiritual
identity then it comes back down to the
same mystical insights the essence of
one is the essence of all the essence is
the essence of the Divine some would say
of the cosmic intelligence the cosmic
principle but it is the question of
identity is really quite critical
shifting into a reincarnational
worldview doesn't undermine the value
are the Integrity of this identity but
it
recontextualizes that identity within
the Soul's identity which is is the
metaconsciousness which holds the
100,000 years say of identity of all of
our lifetime
experiences it's you know it's very hard
to um believe that you have a different
identity that you are not you know this
thing that you've lived with um for so
many years it's even harder to think
that actually you know the oversold or
that essence of you is infinite it's
lived forever and it will live forever I
mean that's a hard one to get your head
around well it's hard in the beginning
but it gets easier uh with practice both
intellectual practice but particularly
with experiential practice and exper
itial
access it's one thing to be
intellectually convinced by the evidence
that reincarnation is a principle
operating in life and then when you
begin to look at life through that lens
a lot of things begin to make sense
which didn't make sense before and that
deepens one's sense of opening to that
but when you actually sort of turn
within and follow your awareness deeper
within your own
Consciousness so that eventually it Taps
into levels of your own
self-awareness which predates your
physical body and you learn the stories
of that self-awareness that come from
another life and those experiences of
that former life have a a distinct
quality of being you while being other
than you but you know that they are you
and if you encounter several such lives
and you die dialogue with them and you
work with them uh then it kind of has
causes a
dilation within your not only in your
thinking but within your heart that it
becomes easier to accept this
Transcendent though individuated but
Transcendent Dimension uh to your
identity it just in eventually it
becomes it hard to think smaller than
that it actually becomes hard to take
this as your only identity that just
you I'm going to ask you some questions
some of the most common questions that
crop up with this subject and you know
the first one is why do we really
incarnate ah well to learn to grow to
become more than we are and that really
kind of gets down to the very basic
question what is the purpose of
existence and if we think we don't
reincarnate if we only live one lifetime
then if there is a purpose to existence
it must be something that can be
realized within however many years we
have in one lifetime but if we live an
open-ended number of lives then it
invites us to expand our understanding
of what the universe is doing in us with
us with all that time and so it opens up
an open-ended developmental possibility
we now have an understanding of the
universe's time frame for the creation
of galaxies and planets and systems and
so on but we we've been excluded from
that because we haven't had a
sufficiently ex expansive understanding
of ourselves reincarnation invites us to
open up into an expansive understanding
of our individual participation in the
cosmic unfolding and so we have all
these lives in order to learn more to
become more to actualize more and it
it's not simply a matter of becoming
enlightened though that's a noble gold
unto itself it's Enlightenment is simply
a stage on in an evolutionary
progression which extends far beyond
Enlightenment I mean if you just think
ahead what will what could we become if
we had a million years
more or a billion years more I have a
problem with this because if we are
sparks of God yeah if we know everything
when we leave and many people say
suddenly they understand everything and
you know they're in a whole other kind
of you know their awareness is so
expanded why do we
need to learn more how much more is
there to learn aren't we complete when
we're there but then we actually you
know kind of regress when we come here
and I don't understand the point of that
yeah well that would be like asking too
a real good question when the
infinite before creation before
manifesting the physical
Universe why would the creative
principle manifest the physical Universe
which almost is inherently less
self-aware lefts knowledgeable and I
think it's not so much we do expand our
knowledge much much more when we are
when we die whether it it seems like it
is infinite knowledge maybe it is but
maybe there's even more than what we
think of as infinite knowledge but the
real question
becomes if God were to come to us and
say would you help me grow this universe
would you bring as much knowledge as you
can into your person and help me grow
this universe into a higher form of
physical manifestation of our spiritual
nature so it's not simply what happens
to us when we die I think we get a
glimpse we expand we get a contact the
question is who would turn down the
invitation to actually participate in a
creative process which will produce
higher and higher and higher deeper and
deeper and deeper forms of
humanity in evolution in history so that
truly we will eventually be able to make
Heaven on Earth we won't Simply Be
imprisoned and dumb and stupid when we
incarnate we will be enlightened we will
be infinitely aware in our physical
Incarnation I think this is the
trajectory that we're on so it's
becoming more and more
uh and participating in the dance of
creation you know I can I can follow
that some of the way I you know yeah I'd
be there saying yeah I I'll participate
but the fact is you know to then come
here and forget everything and to really
be living like you're starting all over
again you know all the knowledge all the
wisdom that you've gathered over all of
those years what happens to it but we
don't forget everything do we
because we we may lose a fair amount of
our conscious recall but what we have
known is built into our unconscious
recall just like these children who may
not remember how they acquired that
mathematical knowledge or other kinds of
knowledge but it's there we not may not
remember how we develop the capacities
that are now na natural to us but there
is a history behind everything that we
are so we don't really forget it all we
just forget some of it but we bring a
lot of it into our very being and then
we ex we express that knowledge in our
life and we develop so that by the time
we finish we have become more we have
incarnated more completely some of that
knowledge than we were at the beginning
of our
lifetime
so many you know we've all seen mediums
who bring loved ones you know to people
um how is it that if somebody has passed
over and they're either in the BAU or
they're reincarnated or they've you know
they're doing whatever they're doing how
is it that they come back you know they
can reconnect to that identity in that
moment to give that you know yeah bed
loved one Whatever message they need
yeah
yeah well now we're getting into the
nuts and bolts of the Soul it's a good
question and I'm going to give a short
answer to a long a long
question
um this is an an ideal scenario but a
not uncommon scenario I think when we
die we return to the soul and after a
transitional period where we evaluate
our current our past life and we
evaluate what went right what went wrong
and we uh assimilate that learning we
return to the soul and we begin to
naturally exchange but we might think of
as our small identity for our large
identity our hundred-year identity for
our 100,000 year identity so that Chris
bash no longer lives just as Chris bash
but is restored to the the total
knowledge of my
soul now let's say my father died when I
was 18 okay so when I die I may want to
see my dad and if I want if I get the
opportunity to see my dad whether or not
his soul has incarnated an aspect of him
in a subsequent
Incarnation I think it works something
like this when my being wants to meet my
dad his soul comes to me but
manifesting the front image of that Soul
would be the being that I had known him
as which would be my father so Chris
bash would meet his father but soon
before too long it would it would be a
matter of soul to soul so Chris bash's
Soul would be meeting my father's soul
and we would be having a much deeper
conversation than simply Chris Bay
speaking to his father now we're having
a cosmic conversation now I think a the
mediums can contact uh people who are
discard it but that we should be careful
before we infer that the form in which
the medium encounters them is the form
in which they are truly existing in
their post-death state I think a lot of
our Fascination and compulsion even to
communicate with those who have died in
the form in which we knew them reflects
a limited
understanding of what happens to us when
we die and it tends to reflect a western
understanding that when we die we are
judged and we go to heaven or hell or
Purgatory or some level of the BAU and
it's a pretty
shortterm
concept I am not particularly in
interested in communicating to my father
as I knew him when so much more uh could
take place in in our Exchange
so in a sense you know the um the soul
of the person that comes through for
somebody
is in a way doing something with
compassion and they're just stepping
into yeah they're wearing the they're
wearing the compassion the presence of
the that this person had known them as
and communicating to that person through
that persona but that persona isn't
necessarily who they truly are
now you know another common question um
is uh and until I read this book I
didn't know how to answer it is um well
how you know how can there be
reincarnation there's far more people on
the planet now than there were you know
a thousand years ago yeah yeah well you
know answer with an analogy start there
if you were at a university and the
university had six th000 students and
you never left campus you lived on
campus and there was a rhythm every
semester there were fewer people that
went home and then every semester they
came back but over a few years you would
notice that the population of the campus
is getting bigger and you might wonder
where are all these extra people coming
from but but of course they're coming
from a town outside of Campus which is a
much much larger Town than the number of
people on campus and I think it's like
that in with
reincarnation we have no reason for
believing that the number of souls
available to Incarnate is finite or that
it's small and that all of them were
present at some early point in uh
Earth's evolutionary history and
therefore we have to explain where all
the extra souls are coming from perhaps
there are billions of souls in line
waiting to take up positions as
positions become available in the earth
school we have no reason for believing
that the number of souls is finite or
that they were all present on Earth in
the beginning so we just have to open
what the invitation here is to open up
to understanding that the spiritual
universe is many many times larger than
the physical Universe Robert Monroe who
working aob body work in the Monroe
Institute emphasized this over and over
the physical universe is a small slice
of
reality most of reality is
spiritual but wasn't it Robert Monro who
also said that um some humans involved
evolved from higher
animals yeah actually that's the uh that
is the common view of most reincarnation
societies that is if we look if we
follow the line back and ask where where
does reincarnation begin they generally
think that it doesn't begin with human
consciousness it begins farther back in
our animal pedigree so reincarnation
seems to be a dynamic that is correlated
with the birth of
individuality grass hard to see grass as
individual but sooner or later we have
individuated Consciousness emerging
within the animal kingdom reincarnation
seems to be a function of that
individuated Consciousness in exploring
and empowering and expanding itself and
that starts before human
beings now we're actually getting uh I
think it's Dr Linda Beckman who does a
past life regression who was trained
with Michael Newton and he told her that
the time would come when many people's
the lives they accessed were not lived
on this planet and that's actually
happening she said I mean her books are
full of stories of you know people's
experiences that they connect with
previous life somewhere else
entirely well we would have to ask at
least on a theoretical level why not if
we just look up at the universe and and
look through the Hubble telescope and
all wonderful images that are coming to
us and we see life burgeoning and star
and planets why shouldn't there be
evolved life on those forms and if
reincarnation is possible then why
should it be only be restricted to one
star system why might not there be some
type of
interplanetary um crossovers I don't
have any personal experience of that
myself but I know that she does and so I
I think well that's interesting it is
interesting it is we're going to take a
short break now now you're listening to
what is going on I'm Sandy sbear my
guest today is professor emeritus in the
department of philosophy and religious
studies at Youngstown State University
and I won't read the rest of what you do
other than you're an international
speaker a teacher and an author
Christopher bash and we're discussing
the compelling research and the
tantalizing questions raised in his book
life cycles reincarnation in the web of
life still to come what happens to those
identities that we once thought were us
why was reincarnation removed from the
scriptures why is our time between lives
as important to our development as our
Earthly phase and more stay
tuned Times
TV hello I'm Sandy sbear host of om
times flagship radio show what is going
on and as an author editor and 13 times
book judge who's read thousands of books
and interviewed hundreds of authors I'm
constantly asked what's really worth
reading and what's not so I created the
no BS spiritual book club to help you
save time and money by picking the
brains of discerning names who have
walked this path before you there's no
catch no fees and no BS just an
evergrowing library of 10 best spiritual
book lists from some of your favorite
authors and teachers plus three book
excerpts audios and video interviews
with people like Dom Miguel Ruiz Jr
David G Lee Harris Mark Neo and more
from well-known Classics to Hidden gems
you've never heard of it's the only no
BS Guide to the best spiritual books to
Enlighten your journey of self-discovery
so why not join the club get inspired
and save money at the no bsp spiritual
book club.com
imagine becoming a Super influencer
reinvent yourself invest in your brand
and then manifest your success with a
robust spheric approach times media and
broadcasting offers a unique and
multifaceted way to become the spiritual
and conscious influencer you deserve to
be by putting your message across our
powerful platform with its proven record
of integrity and Excellence through our
produced shows own times offers the
opportunity to become a social media TV
personality a radio show host an own
Times magazine columnist and a
syndicated ponter all in one shot by
live streaming your show on Times TV and
broadcasting it across the extensive
times radio and TV networks you become
more than a host you become an
ambassador and a force for positive
change own times open yourself to the
possibilities everything that we do we
can do in a contemplative manner through
the art of contemplation you can use the
Jean keys in a really powerful way genan
Keys is basically the code book of life
in the Jean Keys the book is made up of
these three levels Shadows gifts and
cities and the journey is from is
through those three levels kind of
unpicking of the Shadow States the
releasing of the gifts and then the
embodying of this higher Consciousness
called the city and the city's a very
exalted words and it's not like we we
kind of suddenly are all these exalted
Christlike beings but we have flashes
and
illuminations along the journey and the
more we get stuck into the journey the
more illumination comes to us because
the more we're releasing the light from
in these codes inside our DNA so all
those Revelations are inside us so the
contemplative way is the inner way
There are 16 million children struggling
with hunger in America that's one in
five daughters Sons neighbors and
classmates who don't know where their
next meal is coming from yet billions of
pounds of good food go to waste every
year it's time we do something about it
feeding America is a nationwide network
of food banks that helps provide meals
to millions of kids and Families in Need
visit feedingamerica.org to help them
feed even more together we can solve
hunger together we're feeding
America welcome back Christopher bash so
I'm rather attached to this you
know person personality um the thought
that it might disappear at some point
you know like um an actor just shedding
a role that they've played um take off
the costume and never to be seen or
heard from again
you know who said never to be heard and
seen from again well in that form oh in
that form well in that form you know
it's it I don't like that idea I mean
I'd like to know that you know maybe I
could connect with her sometime maybe I
could even bring her back yeah and be
that character again do you think any of
that is
possible well I think the
the the essence in the system of Our
Lives is preserved beautifully intact
when we die we take with us not only all
of our memories but we take with us a
living and
Vivid version of the experiences that we
had on Earth in Technic color and stereo
as the near-death episode experiences
have shown us when they have uh when
they relive their life they relive it in
much much more detail than they were
ever remember remember having it in the
first place so not only do we continue
perfectly intact but we continue in this
super saturated version of ourselves and
all of that is taken forward all of that
is brought into the soul and the Soul
can crystallize its larger Consciousness
in any of its forms or it can actualize
all of their integrated Consciousness
into a singular integrated form and in
the
end I I'm only willing to give this this
100 years if that you know it's it's
just you know it's just too limited I
mean why ride a bicycle when you can
have a spaceship I mean it's just it's
so much so there's no sense of
sacrifice I think there's there's a
sense maybe of trading
up you know sometimes I think that I'm
I'm not very
um elevated in my in my Consciousness
you know and if I have been alive for
Millennia then I'm really not doing a
very good job I like to think you know
after all of that time that I'd be
further on um you know I tend to look at
things like people or beings like Spirit
guides and angels and ascended masters
as um they were once you know just as
human as me me enjoyed a human life
perhaps and have reached such an
elevated State I mean is it conceivable
that I could be one of them one
day well yes of course it's conceivable
because your essential nature already is
one of those beings but let me just kind
of flip this a little
bit I first I just I've been teaching
this stuff for years and I had just
generations and generations of students
come through my courses and one of the
things I've learned is you can't judge
you can't read a book by looking at the
cover you can't judge a person's soul
development by looking at what they're
dealing with and it's kind of like at a
university somebody can have developed a
great deal of expertise in music for
example but then they decide to start
developing an expertise in their art and
so they let go of their expertise in
music in order to start a whole new
course regimen in art and if you were to
look at only what they do in art you
might think oh this person is a freshman
when really they're very sophisticated
senior with all these other skills and I
think it's also that way for the soul
too so I mean I mean look at what you do
you're an enormous influencer you're
you're hosting one spiritual dialogue
after another you you're touching
thousands and thousands of people's
lives what how could your soul if your
soul were in the BAU say in in in a
pre-incarnate state and you were given
the opportunity to bring down some sense
of what you know some aspiration some uh
capacity and enthusiasm for exploring
spiritual knowledge but not by yourself
in a monastic context but in a platform
that reaches out into the world at a
time in history when the world needs
this type of knowledge so my basic
senses don't sell yourself short I mean
I think there are many more bodh satas
in the world than we think um yeah
you're I'm sure you're right okay so
another question white light several
spiritual teachers are of the opinion
that we should not go towards the light
as we will be trapped in cycles of
reincarnation they say they say you can
bypass that and go somewhere else what
do you think of that
one well it doesn't make any sense to me
it doesn't compute for me uh to me the
white light just at a simple level when
we separate from our body the white
light is our homing Beacon uh taking us
back home taking us back to the our
essential nature our deeper Spirit our
deeper divine nature now the basic
classic idea is people
instinctively move towards the light and
they move as far towards the light as
they feel comfortable and at some point
along the way for various reasons people
feel less comfortable or they feel sort
of it's more natural just to stop and
drop drop off and at that they're at
that level of Spiritual Development that
they feel most comfortable in the
thousands and thousands of levels of the
BAU uh and so the the admiss the
admonition for and from that level they
will eventually go through a process in
which they will make the choice to
Incarnate
again the admit uh admonition in most
spiritual Traditions is to do a kind of
training that allows you to be
comfortable with the light so that you
can follow the light all the way home
all the way through all the levels of
the BAU all the way to the most intense
form of that light which res Ides within
what the Buddhist call extra samsaric
reality so a reality which is outside
the entire reincarnating universe
altoe so to me whether our journey into
the light takes us back to our own
natural level of peak spiritual
realization or whether it takes us all
the way back beyond all those
intermediate levels to the highest level
um it doesn't make any much difference
uh to me it makes most sense to follow
the light all the way as far as you can
yeah well you've seen that haven't you I
have and it it touched me in a way that
has affected the entire rest of my life
yeah
yeah so why was um uh
reincarnation taken out of Chris
chisanity I mean for the first 500 years
of Christianity it was a vital component
and then
Justinian removed it yeah well that's a
complex story and and that that I was
first an historian of early Christianity
that was my first academic love and the
search for the historical Jesus was my
first I did my masters at Cambridge in
the search for the historical Jesus and
it's it's a complex process and I don't
think the definitive story has yet been
written
um did Jesus teach
reincarnation it certainly is present in
some of the Gnostic Gospels uh but do
those Gnostic Gospels reflect the actual
teaching of the historical Jesus and if
Jesus did teach
reincarnation then we have to explain
why it was filtered out or if he did
teach reincarnation why isn't it more
thoroughly saturating the earliest level
of the scriptural
tradition however we answer those and I
we don't have the time to answer those
today it clearly is the case that there
were multiple variations of Christianity
in the early centuries and some of those
variations taught reincarnation and they
also taught uh the empowerment of women
that that women should have clerical
capacities and responsibilities so on so
forth and both of those elements were
filtered out of the tradition um it is
gettis McGregor who is a Christian was
Christian Theologian wrote numerous
books on early Christian thought around
reincarnation he was of he's of the
opinion that there is nothing inherently
contradictory to the belief in
reincarnation and the teachings of the
essential Jesus kind of the or early
early core teachings of Jesus but it it
gives an individual too much autonomy
for their spiritual welfare in the
historical context of the collapse of
the Roman Empire the emergence of the
Catholic of Highly centralized Authority
the church saw this highly centralized
network of priest Bishops Cardinals the
pope as essential to the Salvation of
this salvation of the church and
therefore to all whom the church served
so I would give them the benefit of the
doubt and say that they thought they
were doing a good thing by really
creating this system that made
individuals contingent upon the
intermediate cler clergy and the
authority of the church now from a
reincarnational perspective they didn't
do a good thing uh it took us a long
time to
uncover this deeper teaching that where
each one of us is responsible for our
relationship with the Divine the the
church may help us but the end in the
end uh the church is not essential to
the maturing of our relationship to the
Divine well I have another question
about that I mean you you devoted you
know chapter 6 to the question of
whether there's room for reincarnation
in Christian thought
about 35 years ago you know I'd like to
know in a minute if your view on that
has changed but before we do that I want
to make sure we get this one in talk
about the hidden phase of Life the time
between lives which you say is just as
important to our
development yeah and and that's actually
why I named the book life cycles I wish
I had named it a little bit differently
because it became acutely uh um
significant to me
that if you look at the cycle of life as
only taking place between birth and
death you're missing half of the cycle
we miss what happens between death and
birth and you have to look at the whole
cycle to understand the rhythm of the
soul the rhythm of human consciousness
and so there are just as there are kind
of standardized gradations of what
happens when a child is born there
there's a standardized process of what
happens when we die and I think Michael
Newton's work is the some of the best
work I've seen explaining what happens
in the minutes hours years Rel you know
using time in a non-time universe uh
after we die the integration the the
introspection the review of our most
recent life looking at it deeply from
within a spiritual perspective uh
looking at our relationships and our
challenges and uh from a relation from a
deeper spiritual perspective integrating
all of our successes and failures um
really internalizing them entering into
the civilization of Spiritual Beings in
the civilization and in the community of
fellow Soul
Travelers uh
and
enjoying the the recess the the return
to a more complete spiritual awareness
of existence and then in time a gradual
focusing into the next challenge that we
set for ourselves because it's like a
university you finish a semester you
take your exams you digest and rest for
a bit but you make then choices for what
you're going to take next semester and
mutant mutant shows that these choices
are done not by ourselves but under the
guidance and and tutelage of our guides
our senior kind of more senior uh
Spiritual Beings till and we have some
insight into the lives that we're
choosing we have options and we we make
a choice that this particular set of
challenges suits my particular needs
where I am in my development or it gives
me an opportunity to be of service in
ways that I haven't experienced before U
and then we make those choices and then
we've engaged the incarnational process
and we wake up Kicking and Screaming as
a newborn child if you understand the
whole of the cycle then you be have a
much the beginnings of a much deeper
understanding of what makes life tick in
a human psyche than if you only pay
attention from birth to
death so I I was doing some research on
statistics and I discovered that um it
seems you know very obviously uh rough
um numbers but uh something like over
57% of people in the world believe in
life after death between 12 and 44%
depending on you know which country
you're um looking at um believe in
reincarnation
75% believe in heaven yeah and hell you
know which makes me wonder because if
you know only 57 believe in life after
death yeah where's that extra you know
where do they think Heaven and Hell Is I
don't know yeah what do you have to say
about heaven and hell and and 25% of
American Protestants and about the same
percentage of American Catholics believe
in reincarnation that's the one of the
statistics that that really blows my
mind heaven and hell you know I think in
some ways the Buddhists get closest to
it and their basic vision of is when we
die we enter in a universe a stage of
our life where what we are is mirrored
back to us in our in our experience so
if we've done good in life if we've been
generous and kind and and thoughtful
then that is mirrored back to us in the
experience of heaven or the Heavenly
beings if we've done harm and injury and
selfish and stingy things and hurt
people then that is simply mirrored back
to us not out of punishment but to
educate us and this is the experience of
hell so from this perspective hell is
the experience of our shortcomings
Heaven is the experience of our Joys and
I think that work
and and Newton his cosmology seems to
integrate that but this is U would be
mistakenly could be mistakenly
interpreted as a cosmological absolute
when really it's simply a stage in our
debriefing it's a stage that we go
through uh I think the deeper reality is
that there is a heaven of Heavens there
is a heaven beyond the heaven of our
feedback to our own goodness there is a
heaven of
Heavens a reality of infinite love
Infinite knowledge infinite Bliss within
which the entire human evolutionary Saga
is just a small piece and should not be
taken as defining the limits of the
universe is there similarly a hell of
Hells is there an eternal hell and I
absolutely do not believe there is it
has not been so in my experience at all
that is simply a theological mistake a
mistaken
interpretation now I think there is
accountability there is we are
responsible for the actions that we take
and there is an accountability nobody
gets out Scot free but that
accountability does not include this
loathsome idea of Eternal damn or
Eternal punishment no mother or father
would do that to their child for making
mistakes and likewise the Supreme
intelligence of the universe would not
do that to human beings now having said
that let me step into something
different as you know from my book you
know LSD in the mind of the Universe I
have entered and spent many years and
Days in Hell Realms in experienc ing
extreme torture of that that looks like
a hell realm and I my understanding
eventually of this is this just as my
individual psyche retains all my
individual memories both good ones and
traumatic ones there is a consciousness
of the human species which retains all
of its
memories and processes all of those
memories in a central meta
psychological condition what Yung call
the collective un
unconscious and that means all the
terrible things that human beings have
done to each other all the Wars all the
horrors and all the injustices and all
the rapes and the pillaging to the
extent that those have not
been clarified or healed or removed they
become part of the collective torment
the collective shadow of humanity so you
might say that within the human psyche
there are clusters of
memories that have a hellish
quality but that doesn't mean that there
is a
cosmological state of being of hell
because just as individuals have bad
experiences that they can then clear
from their system the human species can
have terrible trauma which it is in the
process of clearing from its system okay
and I think that in the early church
maybe some of the people who had contact
with these Collective hellish Realms
mistakenly interpreted them to as a
cosmological principle of eternal
hell well just we've got about four
minutes left Le less than that quickly
go back to this question whether there
is room for reincarnation in Christian
thought you say that it would only take
a small yeah I think we're of course
traditional Christianity would say no
there's no room for it whatsoever one
life eternal Hellen but I think there
are many Christianity has committed
itself that if anything can be
demonstrated as a fact then we'll find
out how it works and work it into
Christian Theology and if reincarnation
is demonstrated as a fact which I think
it has been and is being then
Christianity will find out how to how it
works and how it makes how to make room
for it all we have to
do incorporate reincarnation within a
Christian framework uh is expand the
notion of the age of the Soul we can
even give Jesus a unique role in
Salvation history if we want to we may
choose to expand to see Jesus as part of
a whole brotherhood and Sisterhood of
Awakened beings helping Humanity but
even if we wanted to make Jesus the
unique sal sal savior of Christianity
all we have to do is open up the notion
that this the Journey of the soul is a
journey of maturation that takes place
over many lifetimes it's not finished in
one Lifetime and all of a sudden the
inadequacies that have been foed on
Christianity by this terribly
shortsighted assumption that we only
have one lifetime so if you only live
six days and you die there's a
consequence to that or if you are a bad
person or you do something bad in the
first 10 years of your life you could go
to hell for the rest of your life these
terrible consequences the kindness of
the universe The Compassion of Jesus has
much more room to grow in a world which
understands that he's talking to souls
he's not simply talking to personalities
he's talking to souls in his
teaching last question very quickly you
in the book by talking about the Web of
Life understanding The rhythms of our
life as an ongoing dialogue which is
you've kind of covered in what you've
just said more or less is there anything
that you want to add to
that I've lived in the reincarnational
worldview so long and I've I've taught
it and and talked with people and
listened to their stories and processes
people's life experience that it is so
natural to me to understand the
uniqueness of every soul and the
uniqueness of every Incarnation and the
complex background web between lives and
circumstances that to see life in the
old way what I used to see it in this
kind of Silo way is completely unnatural
intellectually and spiritually untenable
and spiritually unnourished so to me
reincarnation doesn't answer all our
questions but it is the beginning of
deeper and deeper and deeper questions
and deeper answers which brings a true
richness and a deep
satisfaction to the life process it it
takes out this terrible horror of a good
God who I think I'm gonna have to cut
you there it looks like we've gone over
time I'm so sorry but that's okay what
can I say you know talking to you is
always fascinating s thank you so much
for joining us today thank you Sandy so
life cycles reincarnation and the web of
life is still available in paperback
format and for more information about
LSD and the mind of the universe and
Chris's other books articles and events
visit his website Chris bash.com that's
it for this week I'll be back at the
same time next week with another what is
going on till then it's goodbye from me
and thank you again to Chris bash thank
you Sandy
[Music]